Catherine DeJager
Final Comprehensive Paper
There are many movements that have influenced the unfolding of global history. Some movements have had held more importance than others. Industrialism, imperialism/colonialism, nationalism, communism, democratization,  militarism, feminism, and globalism are all important. Industrialism and colonialism are the most important.
The Industrial Revolution is important. The Industrial Revolution refers to a particular transformation of technology”. The Industrial Revolution “made mass production possible with the use of power-driven machines”[1]. Industrialism led to capitalism which led to exploitation of the workers. Industrialism was important in that it gave rise to capitalism. One unfortunate effect of this was child labor. For example, Matthew Crabtree talked about his experience working in a factory at age eight. “I was, when working those long hours, commonly very much fatigued at night, when I left my work; so much so that I sometimes should have slept as I walk if I had not stumbled and started awake again; and so sick often that I could not eat, and what I did eat I vomited.” He also mentions the unreasonable working conditions. “I generally was beaten when I happened to be too late; and when I got up in the morning the apprehension of that was so great, that I used to run, and cry all the way as I went to the mill.”[2] Industrialism also led to a greater interconnectedness. Marx and Engels explain the effects of capitalism and industrialization in the Communist Manifesto. “In place of the old wants, satisfied by the production of the country, we find new wants, requiring for their satisfaction the products of distant lands and climes. In place of the old local and national seclusion and self-sufficiency, we have intercourse in every direction, universal interdependence of nations. And as in material, so also in intellectual production. The intellectual creations of individual nations become common property. National one-sidedness and narrow-mindedness become more and more impossible, and from the numerous national and local literatures there arises a world literature.”[3] Industrialism was a wonderful phenomenon allowed by technology. Because of the opportunities that industrialism afforded, more communication was possible. Ideas spread. The reason industrialism was so important is that it was this initial connection that made the other movements possible.
Imperialism and colonialism are significant. Imperialism was the expansion and conquest. The countries were absorbed and lost autonomy. This was the period from 1792 to 1776. From 1776 to 1880 was free trade imperialism: “the desire by European countries in general and by Britain in particular to expand their zones of free trade. It also refers to a widespread opposition to the expense of colonization, a conviction held especially among the British, who garnered all of the advantages of political empire without the costs of occupation and outright ownership”[4]. The Joys of Motherhood is a novel that shows the negative effects of colonialism. In the lives of the major characters, Colonialism is as an interference, a negative presence, and a change for the worse. The economy in Lagos suffers because of capitalism, and it gets even worse during the war as employers leave and goods become more expensive. The Ibo people become dependent on the colonists. When Nnaife is forced to join the army, Ubani laments, “The British own us, just like God does, and just like God they are free to take any of us when they wish.”[5] This is an example of the devastating impact of colonialism on the societal, economic, and political structure of colonies. Colonialism also sets the stage for inequality. Countries that were colonized suffered while the countries that had colonies flourished. This inequality and asymmetric interdependency set the stage for later movements of independence and also meant that colonies had to develop later and cope with the difference of the inequality[a].
Nationalism was important. Nationalism was the concept of self-determination; that a group of people, a nation, had the right for itself to form an independent state. Nationalism was also anticolonialism; the rejection of the imposition of colonial rule and the desire to remain independent and find their[b] own identity. Nationalism was significant in that it spread the idea of independence and freedom.
Communism was important. Communism is a movement in response to capitalism that seeks to subvert the bourgeois hierarchy and make everyone equal. Communism is the revolutionary form of socialism. Communism is the movement of dependency into existence. In theory, communism leads to utopian society. In actuality, it led to war. The Cold War was a result of the divide between the communist Soviet Union and the capitalist United States. Communism was significant in that it gave rise to democratic movements.
Democratization was important. It was the spread of democratic movements. “Demands for democracy were voiced against the clients of the Soviet Union and the United States… and by the leaders of those superpowers”[6]. One example of democratic movements was the women in the Plaza de Mayo. Their children had been taken away from them and killed by the government. They organized protests. During the World Cup, “we women worked to spread the news about our group. We sent hundreds of letters to foreign politicians, and we sought interviews with different TV networks. Those men listened to us wide-eyed, some became indignant, and all considered us news”[7].
Militarism was important. The buildup of offensive technology and the increased aggression led to war. World War I, World War II, and the Cold War all led to destruction. The destruction caused by these wars fundamentally changed the way states interacted. The destruction was bad.
Feminism was important. Feminism was important in that half the world’s population began to stand up for themselves. Feminism also set an example in a broader pattern of human rights. Because women gained equality, other oppressed groups were able to make their voices heard.
Globalization was significant. Globalization is “a complex phenomenon whereby individuals, nations, and regions of the world become increasingly integrated and interdependent, while national and traditional identities are diminished”[8]. Globalization connected countries and people.
History is important and there are a lot of movements that influenced it. Some movements influenced it more than others. Industrialism is important because the increase in technology allowed for mass production, which allowed for more connections between and among countries. Colonialism is important because it established systems of inequality that plagued the colonies for years to come.
________________
[1] Reilly, Kevin. Worlds of History (Boston: Bedford/St. Martin, 2013) ed. Kevin Reilly, 799-800
[2] The Sadler Report of the House of Commons in Worlds of History (Boston: Bedford/St. Martin, 2013) ed. Kevin Reilly, 813-815
[3] Karl Marx and Friedrich Engles, The Communist Manifesto in Worlds of History (Boston: Bedford/St. Martin, 2013) ed. Kevin Reilly, 820
[4] Kevin Reilly, Worlds of History (Boston: Bedford/St. Martin, 2013) ed. Kevin Reilly, 799-800
[5] Buchi Emecheta, The Joys of Motherhood (New York: George Braziller), 148
[6] Kevin Reilly, Worlds of History (Boston: Bedford/St. Martin, 2013) ed. Kevin Reilly, 1039
[7] Hebe de Bonafini and Matilde Sánchez, “The Madwomen at the Plaza de Mayo” in Worlds of History (Boston: Bedford/St. Martin, 2013) ed. Kevin Reilly, 1046
[8] Kevin Reilly, Worlds of History (Boston: Bedford/St. Martin, 2013) ed. Kevin Reilly, 1089
[a]revise
[b]clarify