Catherine DeJager
Ms. Smith
AP Literature and Composition
27 October 2015
Required word count: 250-650
Current word count: 530
Prompt: The lessons we take from failure can be fundamental to later success. Recount an incident or time when you experienced failure. How did it affect you, and what did you learn from the experience?
I charged ahead in blissful ignorance, which lasted about ten minutes. Sweat trickled across my face as the weight of my mellophone slowly dragged my arms down. I’d just moved back from Japan, and at my first 4th of July Parade I felt more pain than patriotism. The concept of marching band was foreign. It wasn’t just the strange instrument or the idea of moving and playing at the same time, everything about marching band and my new life in America was challenging. 
At my old school, success was achievable. I took the most advanced courses offered and was considered top of my class. In 8th grade, the teacher promoted me to the advanced high school band, and to fit the schedule I taught myself geometry. No matter what the situation in school, as long as I was willing to work hard, I could excel.
In marching band, however, I felt like a failure. My feet stumbled along the field, never reaching their intended locations, always behind everyone else. I was the wrong note in a good chord, the wrong person in a good form. Disappointment surrounded me and blocked out even the tiniest ray of hope. Every effort exhausted me without even bringing me close to success. I let my feet drag and my arms slip, convinced nothing mattered. I counted the measures until the end of each rep, the days until the end of the season .
At the first competition, my perspective changed. Beautiful music, impeccable marching, and unified intensity carried us through a great performance. I was part of that success but wasn’t nearly as successful as I wanted to be. My mellophone hung several degrees below the required angle, sounds seldom erupting from it because marching mattered more. My shoulders refused to stay flat, turning from the sideline in shame. My knees bent and my body bounced, drawing everyone’s attention to the person with poor technique. This time, though, motivation outweighed apathy. I pulled my arms up, ignoring the ache. Every time my shoulders shifted, I snapped them back, facing the challenge straight on. Each step was an opportunity for constant analysis. Is this the right size, is my leg straight, is my upper body still? Most of the time, the answer was no, but I was doing everything I could to make the answer yes.
Through marching band, I learned that focusing on results doesn’t work and the process is what matters most. I might not be the best, but I can still enjoy participating. Although marching band requires a tremendous amount of effort, it’s a meaningful activity. Similarly, I chose to take BC Calculus because I’ve learned that pushing myself to do something advanced is better than coasting to the goals I know are easy to reach. I hope to take this lesson with me to college. I will be able to learn something from every opportunity. Comparing myself to others led me to failure and frustration. Trying the hardest I could and focusing on improving is what led me to success. I can try really hard and still not be the best, but that is so much better than not trying at all.